Rewrite Inheritance and the prototype chain (#18179)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/javascript/inheritance_and_the_prototype_chain/index.md

---
{{jsSidebar("Advanced")}}

JavaScript is a bit confusing for developers experienced in class-based languages (like Java or C++), as it is dynamic and does not have static types.

When it comes to inheritance, JavaScript only has one construct: objects. Each object has a private property which holds a link to another object called its **prototype**. That prototype object has a prototype of its own, and so on until an object is reached with `null` as its prototype. By definition, `null` has no prototype, and acts as the final link in this **prototype chain**. It is possible to mutate any member of the prototype chain or even swap out the prototype at runtime, so concepts like [static dispatching](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_dispatch) do not exist in JavaScript.

> While this confusion is often considered to be one of JavaScript's weaknesses, the prototypical inheritance model itself is, in fact, more powerful than the classic model. It is, for example, fairly trivial to build a classic model on top of a prototypical model — as is how [classes](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes) are implemented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While this confusion is often considered to be one of JavaScript's weaknesses, the prototypical inheritance model itself is, in fact, more powerful than the classic model. It is, for example, fairly trivial to build a classic model on top of a prototypical model — which is how [classes](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes) are implemented.
```

> While this confusion is often considered to be one of JavaScript's weaknesses, the prototypical inheritance model itself is, in fact, more powerful than the classic model. It is, for example, fairly trivial to build a classic model on top of a prototypical model.

Author: Errr, a "model", as compared to say a "language mechanism" I guess. When we say "no classes" we are mostly talking about "no static dispatching" and stuff. JS classes are really different from Java/C classes.

> While this confusion is often considered to be one of JavaScript's weaknesses, the prototypical inheritance model itself is, in fact, more powerful than the classic model. It is, for example, fairly trivial to build a classic model on top of a prototypical model.

Author: Removed the mentions that JS doesn't have classes. Since there's no AOT compilation anyway it only creates confusion.

> Although classes are now widely adopted and have become a new paradigm in JavaScript, it does not bring a new inheritance pattern. While it abstracts most of the prototypical mechanism away, it is still useful to understand how prototypes work under the hood.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although classes are now widely adopted and have become a new paradigm in JavaScript, classes do not bring a new inheritance pattern. While classes abstract most of the prototypical mechanism away, understanding how prototypes work under the hood is still useful.
```

## Inheritance with the prototype chain

### Inheriting properties

JavaScript objects are dynamic "bags" of properties (referred to as **own properties**). JavaScript objects have a link to a prototype object. When trying to access a property of an object, the property will not only be sought on the object but on the prototype of the object, the prototype of the prototype, and so on until either a property with a matching name is found or the end of the prototype chain is reached.

> > **Note:** Following the ECMAScript standard, the notation `someObject.[[Prototype]]` is used to designate the prototype of `someObject`. Since ECMAScript 2015, the `[[Prototype]]` is accessed using the accessors {{jsxref("Object.getPrototypeOf()")}} and {{jsxref("Object.setPrototypeOf()")}}. This is equivalent to the JavaScript accessor [`__proto__`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/proto) which is non-standard but de-facto implemented by many JavaScript engines. To avoid confusion while keeping it succinct, in our notation we will avoid using `obj.__proto__` but use `obj.[[Prototype]]` instead. This corresponds to `Object.getPrototypeOf(obj)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** Following the ECMAScript standard, the notation `someObject.[[Prototype]]` is used to designate the prototype of `someObject`. Since ECMAScript 2015, the `[[Prototype]]` is accessed using the accessors {{jsxref("Object.getPrototypeOf()")}} and {{jsxref("Object.setPrototypeOf()")}}. This is equivalent to the JavaScript accessor [`__proto__`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/proto) which is non-standard but de-facto implemented by many JavaScript engines. To prevent confusion while keeping it succinct, in our notation we will avoid using `obj.__proto__` but use `obj.[[Prototype]]` instead. This corresponds to `Object.getPrototypeOf(obj)`.
```

>
> It should not be confused with the `func.prototype` property of functions, which instead specifies the `[[Prototype]]` to be assigned to all _instances_ of objects created by the given function when used as a constructor. We will discuss the `prototype` property of constructor functions in [a later section](#constructors).

> There are several ways to specify the `[[Prototype]]` of an object, which are listed in [a later section](#different_ways_of_creating_and_mutating_prototype_chains). As of now, we will use the [`__proto__` syntax](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Object_initializer#prototype_setter) for illustration. Worth noting that the `{ __proto__: ... }` syntax is different from the `obj.__proto__` accessor: the former is standard and not deprecated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are several ways to specify the `[[Prototype]]` of an object, which are listed in [a later section](#different_ways_of_creating_and_mutating_prototype_chains). For now, we will use the [`__proto__` syntax](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Object_initializer#prototype_setter) for illustration. It’s worth noting that the `{ __proto__: ... }` syntax is different from the `obj.__proto__` accessor: the former is standard and not deprecated.
```

// no property found, return undefined.
```

> Setting a property to an object creates an own property. The only exception to the getting and setting behavior rules is when there is an inherited property as a [getter or a setter](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Working_with_Objects#defining_getters_and_setters).

Author: Let's just say "when it gets intercepted by a getter/setter".

When an inherited function is executed, the value of [`this`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/this) points to the inheriting object, not to the prototype object where the function is an own property.

```js
const parent = {
  value: 2,
  method: function () {
    return this.value + 1;
  }
};

console.log(parent.method()); // 3
// When calling parent.m in this case, 'this' refers to parent

// child is an object that inherits from parent
const child = {
  __proto__: parent,
};
console.log(child.method()); // 3
// When child.method is called, 'this' refers to child.
// So when child inherits the method of parent,
// The property 'value' is sought on child. However, since child
// doesn't have an own property called 'value', the property is
// found on the [[Prototype]], which is parent.value.

child.value = 4; // assign the value 4 to the property 'value' on child.
// This shadows the 'value' property on parent.
// The child object now looks like:
// { value: 4, __proto__: { value: 2, method: [Function] } }
console.log(child.method()); // 5
// Since child now has the 'value' property, 'this.value' means
// child.value instead
```

## Constructors

> The power of prototypes is we can reuse a set of properties if they should be present on every instance — especially for methods. Suppose we are to create a series of boxes, where each box is an object that contains a value which can be accessed through a `getValue` function. A naïve implementation would be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The power of prototypes is that we can reuse a set of properties if they should be present on every instance — especially for methods. Suppose we are to create a series of boxes, where each box is an object that contains a value which can be accessed through a `getValue` function. A naïve implementation would be:
```

```js
const boxes = [
  { value: 1, getValue() { return this.value; } },
  { value: 2, getValue() { return this.value; } },
  { value: 3, getValue() { return this.value; } },
];
```

> This is subpar, because each instance has its own function property that does the same thing, which is duplicated and unnecessary. Instead, we can move `getValue` to the `[[Prototype]]` of all boxes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is subpar, because each instance has its own function property that does the same thing, which is redundant and unnecessary. Instead, we can move `getValue` to the `[[Prototype]]` of all boxes:
```

```js
// A constructor function
function Box(value) {
  this.value = value;
}

// Properties all boxes created from the Box() constructor
// will have
Box.prototype.getValue = function () {
  return this.value;
};

const boxes = [
  new Box(1),
  new Box(2),
  new Box(3),
];
```

We say that `new Box(1)` is an _instance_ created from the `Box` constructor function. `Box.prototype` is not much different from the `boxPrototype` object we created previously — it's just a plain object. Every instance created from a constructor function will automatically have the constructor's `prototype` property as its `[[Prototype]]` — that is, `Object.getPrototypeOf(new Box()) === Box.prototype`. `Constructor.prototype` by default has one own property: [`constructor`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/constructor), which references the constructor function itself — that is, `Box.prototype.constructor === Box`. This allows one to access the original constructor from any instance.

> > **Note:** If a non-primitive is returned from the constructor function, that value will become the result of the `new` expression. In this case the `[[Prototype]]` may not be correctly bound — but it should not happen much in practice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** If a non-primitive is returned from the constructor function, that value will become the result of the `new` expression. In this case the `[[Prototype]]` may not be correctly bound — but this should not happen much in practice.
```

The above constructor function can be rewritten in [classes](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes) as:

```js
class Box {
  constructor(value) {
    this.value = value;
  }

  // Methods are created on Box.prototype
  getValue() {
    return this.value;
  }
}
```

> Classes are syntax sugar over constructor functions, which means you can still manipulate `Box.prototype` to change the behavior of all instances. However, because classes are designed to be abstraction over the underlying prototype mechanism, we will use the more-lightweight constructor function syntax for this tutorial to fully demonstrate how prototypes work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Classes are syntax sugar over constructor functions, which means you can still manipulate `Box.prototype` to change the behavior of all instances. However, because classes are designed to be an abstraction over the underlying prototype mechanism, we will use the more-lightweight constructor function syntax for this tutorial to fully demonstrate how prototypes work.
```

### Implicit constructors of literals

Some literal syntaxes in JavaScript create instances that implicitly set the `[[Prototype]]`. For example:

```js
// Object literals (without the `__proto__` key) automatically
// have `Object.prototype` as their `[[Prototype]]`
const object = { a: 1 };
Object.getPrototypeOf(object) === Object.prototype; // true

// Array literals automatically have `Array.prototype` as their `[[Prototype]]`
const array = [1, 2, 3];
Object.getPrototypeOf(array) === Array.prototype; // true

// RegExp literals automatically have `RegExp.prototype` as their `[[Prototype]]`
const regexp = /abc/;
Object.getPrototypeOf(regexp) === RegExp.prototype; // true
```

We can "de-sugar" them into their constructor form.

```js
const array = new Array(1, 2, 3);
const regexp = new RegExp("abc");
```

For example, "array methods" like [`map()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/map) are simply methods defined on `Array.prototype`, which is why they are automatically available on all array instances.

> > **Warning:** One misfeature that is often used is to extend `Object.prototype` or one of the other built-in prototypes — for example, defining `Array.prototype.myMethod = function () {...}` and then using `myMethod` on all array instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Warning:** There is one misfeature that is often used is to extend `Object.prototype` or one of the other built-in prototypes. An example of this misfeature is, defining `Array.prototype.myMethod = function () {...}` and then using `myMethod` on all array instances.
```

>

> > This technique is called _monkey patching_. Doing so risks forward compatibility, because if the language adds this method in the future but with a different signature, your code will break. It has led to incidents like the [SmooshGate](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/smooshgate/), and can be a great nuisance for the language to advance since JavaScript tries to "not break the web".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This misfeature is called _monkey patching_. Doing monkey patching risks forward compatibility, because if the language adds this method in the future but with a different signature, your code will break. It has led to incidents like the [SmooshGate](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/smooshgate/), and can be a great nuisance for the language to advance since JavaScript tries to "not break the web".
```

```js
Number.prototype + 1 // 1
Array.prototype.map((x) => x + 1) // []
String.prototype + "a" // "a"
RegExp.prototype.source // "(?:)"
Function.prototype() // Function.prototype is a no-op function by itself
```

However, this is not the case for user-defined constructors, nor for modern constructors like `Map`.

```js
Map.prototype.get(1)
// Uncaught TypeError: Method Map.prototype.get called on incompatible receiver #<Map>
```

### Building longer inheritance chains

The `Constructor.prototype` property will become the `[[Prototype]]` of the constructor's instances, as-is — including `Constructor.prototype`'s own `[[Prototype]]`. By default, `Constructor.prototype` is a _plain object_ — that is, `Object.getPrototypeOf(Constructor.prototype) === Object.prototype`. The only exception is `Object.prototype` itself, whose `[[Prototype]]` is `null` — that is, `Object.getPrototypeOf(Object.prototype) === null`. Therefore, a typical constructor will build the following prototype chain:

```js
function Constructor() {}

const obj = new Constructor();

> // obj --> Constructor.prototype --> Object.prototype --> null

Author: Thanks, I prefer shorter ones but there are too many long ones so I fell back to sticking with existing style.

```

To build longer prototype chains, we can set the `[[Prototype]]` of `Constructor.prototype` via the [`Object.setPrototypeOf()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/setPrototypeOf) function.

```js
function Base() {}
function Derived() {}
// Set the `[[Prototype]]` of `Derived.prototype`
// to `Base.prototype`
Object.setPrototypeOf(
  Derived.prototype,
  Base.prototype,
);

const obj = new Derived();
// obj ---> Derived.prototype ---> Base.prototype ---> Object.prototype ---> null
```

In class terms, this is equivalent to using the [`extends`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes/extends) syntax.

```js
class Base {}
class Derived extends Base {}

const obj = new Derived();
// obj ---> Derived.prototype ---> Base.prototype ---> Object.prototype ---> null
```

> You may also see some legacy code using [`Object.create`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/create). However, because this re-assigns the `prototype` property, it's a bad practice as previously described.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may also see some legacy code using [`Object.create`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/create). However, because this re-assigns the `prototype` property, it's a bad practice, for the reasons previously described here.
```

doSomething.prototype.foo:  bar
```

## Different ways of creating and mutating prototype chains

> We have encountered three ways to create objects and its corresponding prototype chain already: through constructor functions and `new`, through an object literal and the `__proto__` key, and through classes. There's a fourth: [`Object.create()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/create). In addition, we will explain how prototype chains can be mutated after they are created.

Author: Indeed—it's hard to write an introductory paragraph...

function f() {
  return 2;
}
// Functions inherit from Function.prototype
// (which has methods call, bind, etc.)
// f ---> Function.prototype ---> Object.prototype ---> null

const p = { b: 2, __proto__: o };
// It is possible to point the newly created object's [[Prototype]] to
// another object via the __proto__ literal property. (Not to be confused
// with Object.prototype.__proto__ accessors)
// p ---> o ---> Object.prototype ---> null
```

<table class="standard-table">
  <caption>
    Pros and cons of using the <code>__proto__</code> key in <a href="/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Object_initializer">object initializers</a>
  </caption>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th scope="row">Pro(s)</th>
      <td>

>         Supported in all modern runtimes. Pointing the <code>__proto__</code>

Author: Correct—it should be "engines" to be the most correct. Colloquially I tend to use runtimes/engines interchangeably, and the original text was "browser" which I like even less.

```js
console.log(g.hasOwnProperty('vertices'));
// true

console.log(Object.hasOwn(g, 'vertices'));
// true

console.log(g.hasOwnProperty('nope'));
// false

console.log(Object.hasOwn(g, 'nope'));
// false

console.log(g.hasOwnProperty('addVertex'));
// false

console.log(Object.hasOwn(g, 'addVertex'));
// false

console.log(Object.getPrototypeOf(g).hasOwnProperty('addVertex'));
// true
```

Note: It is **not** enough to check whether a property is [`undefined`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/undefined). The property might very well exist, but its value just happens to be set to `undefined`.

## Conclusion

JavaScript may be a bit confusing for developers coming from Java or C++, as it's all dynamic, all runtime, and it has no static types at all. Everything is either an object (instance) or a function (constructor), and even functions themselves are instances of the `Function` constructor. Even the "classes" as syntax constructs are just constructor functions at runtime.

> All constructor functions in JavaScript has a special property called `prototype`, which works with the `new` operator. The reference to the prototype object is copied to the internal `[[Prototype]]` property of the new instance. For example, when you do `const a1 = new A()`, JavaScript (after creating the object in memory and before running function `A()` with `this` defined to it) sets `a1.[[Prototype]] = A.prototype`. When you then access properties of the instance, JavaScript first checks whether they exist on that object directly, and if not, it looks in `[[Prototype]]`. `[[Prototype]]` is looked at _recursively_, i.e. `a1.doSomething`, `Object.getPrototypeOf(a1).doSomething`, `Object.getPrototypeOf(Object.getPrototypeOf(a1)).doSomething` etc., until it's found or `Object.getPrototypeOf` returns `null`. This means that all properties defined on `prototype` are effectively shared by all instances, and you can even later change parts of `prototype` and have the changes appear in all existing instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All constructor functions in JavaScript have a special property called `prototype`, which works with the `new` operator. The reference to the prototype object is copied to the internal `[[Prototype]]` property of the new instance. For example, when you do `const a1 = new A()`, JavaScript (after creating the object in memory and before running function `A()` with `this` defined to it) sets `a1.[[Prototype]] = A.prototype`. When you then access properties of the instance, JavaScript first checks whether they exist on that object directly, and if not, it looks in `[[Prototype]]`. `[[Prototype]]` is looked at _recursively_, i.e. `a1.doSomething`, `Object.getPrototypeOf(a1).doSomething`, `Object.getPrototypeOf(Object.getPrototypeOf(a1)).doSomething` etc., until it's found or `Object.getPrototypeOf` returns `null`. This means that all properties defined on `prototype` are effectively shared by all instances, and you can even later change parts of `prototype` and have the changes appear in all existing instances.
```

> If, in the example above, you do `const a1 = new A(); const a2 = new A();` then `a1.doSomething` would actually refer to `Object.getPrototypeOf(a1).doSomething`, which is the same as the `A.prototype.doSomething` you defined, i.e. `Object.getPrototypeOf(a1).doSomething == Object.getPrototypeOf(a2).doSomething == A.prototype.doSomething`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If, in the example above, you do `const a1 = new A(); const a2 = new A();`, then `a1.doSomething` would actually refer to `Object.getPrototypeOf(a1).doSomething` — which is the same as the `A.prototype.doSomething` you defined, i.e. `Object.getPrototypeOf(a1).doSomething == Object.getPrototypeOf(a2).doSomething == A.prototype.doSomething`.
```

  </tbody>
</table>

## Performance

The lookup time for properties that are high up on the prototype chain can have a negative impact on the performance, and this may be significant in the code where performance is critical. Additionally, trying to access nonexistent properties will always traverse the full prototype chain.

> Also, when iterating over the properties of an object, **every** enumerable property that is on the prototype chain will be enumerated. To check whether an object has a property defined on _itself_ and not somewhere on its prototype chain, it is necessary to use the [`hasOwnProperty`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/hasOwnProperty) or [`Object.hasOwn`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/hasOwn) methods. All objects inherit [`hasOwnProperty`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/hasOwnProperty) from `Object.prototype`. To give you a concrete example, let's take the above graph example code to illustrate it:

Author: We're comparing them side-by-side so I think it's not _very_ bad. Added a note about `null` prototype.

```js
console.log(g.hasOwnProperty('vertices'));
// true

console.log(Object.hasOwn(g, 'vertices'));
// true

console.log(g.hasOwnProperty('nope'));
// false

console.log(Object.hasOwn(g, 'nope'));
// false

console.log(g.hasOwnProperty('addVertex'));
// false

console.log(Object.hasOwn(g, 'addVertex'));
// false

console.log(Object.getPrototypeOf(g).hasOwnProperty('addVertex'));
// true
```

Note: It is **not** enough to check whether a property is [`undefined`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/undefined). The property might very well exist, but its value just happens to be set to `undefined`.

## Conclusion

> JavaScript is a bit confusing for developers coming from Java or C++, as it's all dynamic, all runtime, and it has no classes at all. It's all just instances (objects). Even the "classes" we simulate are just a function object.

Author: This is the conclusion so it's fine to re-state. I've rephrased it a bit.
